feat: ✨ post on using Python for data engineering (#280)
seedcase-project/decisions: why-python-for-data-processing/index.qmd

---
title: "Why Python for data processing"
description: |
  Our core work revolves around processing data in various ways. This decision post
  explains why we use Python for that work and for building libraries that simplify
  that work.
date: "2026-06-01"
categories:
  - develop
  - process
  - script
---

## Context and problem statement

::: content-hidden
State the context and some background on the issue, then write a statement in
the form of a question for the problem.
:::

Our core work revolves around designing, building, and processing structured and
tidied data from various uncleaned sources, so that it can be used for research
analysis. An effective and powerful language can greatly simplify this type of
work.

We [previously decided](/why-python/index.qmd) to use Python for both data
processing work as well as for developing all of our software tools, which meant
we compared languages that could do both of those things rather than just one of
them. However, our needs for building software tools changed, especially as we
shifted to building more command-line and web-based tools. Because of this, we

> reconsidered Python for building software tools, and instead [switced to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
reconsidered Python for building software tools, and instead [switched to
```

Rust](/why-rust-for-building-software/index.qmd). But we still need to do data
processing work. With the focus only on data processing, we can have more
targeted and meaningful comparisons of languages for this purpose.

So we want to determine, *which programming language is best suited for data

> processing work and building libraries to support that work?*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rust](/why-rust-for-building-software/index.qmd). We still need a language suitable for processing data and with this more narrow focus, we can ask the question: *which programming language is best suited for data
processing work, including building supporting libraries?*.
```

## Decision drivers

::: content-hidden
List some reasons for why we need to make this decision and what things have
arisen that impact work.
:::

We need a language that:

- Can be used for both data processing as well as for building libraries to

>   simplify that work or to bundle code up to be re-used in other projects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Can be used for data processing directly and for building libraries supporting data processing workflows to be re-used in other projects.
```

range of languages, even if they weren't very well suited for data processing.
For example, we compared Java and C++ alongside R and Python. For this decision
post, we are focusing firmly on languages designed for data processing as well
as with decent capabilities for building packages (libraries) to simplify that
data processing work. Based on our drivers and this focus, we are only comparing
two languages:

- [R](https://www.r-project.org/)
- [Python](https://www.python.org/)

There are other languages that match some of our drivers but not all of them:

- [SQL](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SQL) is a powerful language for data
  processing. However, it is not a general-purpose programming language and
  doesn't have the capabilities for building libraries to support data
  processing work, so we are excluding it from consideration.
- [Scala](https://www.scala-lang.org) is a commonly used language in data
  engineering, but is nearly unknown in data science and the research community.
- [Julia](https://julialang.org/) is a fairly new language that is designed for
  data science and has powerful data processing capabilities. But it is not

>   widely used and it's mostly aimed at mathematically computation and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  widely used and it's mostly aimed at mathematical computation and
```

>   statistical analysis rather than data engineering.

Reviewer: It seems natural to mention why we don't use Rust here since we picked it for software development and it supports both polars and duckdb. I'm imagining the reason will simply be lack of popularity and maturity in this space.

- Has an extremely flexible programming environment, where there are few rules
  on how things are done. It was designed in a way to do analysis interactively
  in the R console, rather than to write scripts that are run from start to
  finish. This means it is very easy to get started, write code that works, and
  get stuff done quickly.
:::::

::::: column
#### Drawbacks

- Package dependency management isn't really built into the language, so pinning
  specific versions of packages used is quite difficult and depends on external
  tools like [renv](https://rstudio.github.io/renv/) (which itself has a number
  of limitations).
- Is not as commonly used with the data engineering community and ecosystem,
  likely because it mainly came from statistics and analysis, rather than from
  data processing and engineering.
- It isn't as well-developed for building packages compared to other languages,
  as it doesn't yet have continuous delivery tools for distributing packages,
  nor are the checks that CRAN (the package registry) runs publicly available,
  which makes it more difficult to build packages that pass the CRAN checks
  without first uploading to them.

> - It's flexibility in the programming environment is also it's weakness, as it

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Its flexibility in the programming environment is also its weakness, as it
```

  can lead to unexpected issues and behaviours if you don't know the language
  well enough to know how to avoid those pitfalls. Because of this, writing code
  that is robust, reliable, re-usable, and reproducible is a bit harder to
  achieve compared to other languages.
:::::
:::

### Python

[Python](https://www.python.org/) is an interpreted, high-level, general-purpose
programming language. Python's design philosophy emphasizes code readability,
for example by using whitespace as part of its syntax. Its language uses an
object-oriented approach and is often quoted as being ["the second-best language
for everything"](https://sixfeetup.com/blog/4-reasons-to-choose-python).

::: columns
::::: column
#### Benefits

> - Because it is so general-purpose and "second best", it has a massive community

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It has a massive community
```

  with a large number of packages for many different programming tasks,
  including data processing.
- It is widely used in the data science, machine learning, and data engineering
  communities.

> - It often is "marketed" as the glue between languages, which means many tools

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Many tools
```

  have some bindings or connections into Python. For example, SQL databases can
  be easily connected into Python with packages like
  [SQLAlchemy](https://www.sqlalchemy.org/), and many data processing tools have
  Python bindings, such as [Arrow](https://arrow.apache.org/),
  [DuckDB](https://duckdb.org/), [Spark](https://spark.apache.org/), and
  [Polars](https://www.pola.rs/).
- It has packages for easily connecting to different sources, such as web APIs
  and other programming languages.
- It has a lot of programming features from different paradigms, which means it
  is flexible in how it can be used and written.
- Like R, it is dynamically typed, which means you don't need to worry about
  types when writing code, so it can be easy to write something that (at least
  seems to) work and get stuff done quickly.

> - It's package development features are quite good, especially when paired with

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Its package development features are quite good, especially when paired with
```

  tools like [uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/), and distributing packages through
  [PyPI](https://pypi.org/) can be done with a single command and integrated
  into continuous delivery pipelines.
- Because it is used in so many different industries and communities and has so
  many packages, there is a robust ecosystem of tools to make it easier to build
  stable and reliable packages (compared to R and similar languages).
:::::

::::: column
#### Drawbacks

- The documentation for different packages is of inconsistent quality, even
  within the official Python documentation. This can make it difficult to
  effectively use some functionality or packages.
- Like R, Python's flexibility is also its weakness, as it doesn't have strong
  guardrails when writing code. This means it can be harder to know if the code
  you wrote is actually doing what you think it's doing, even if it runs and
  outputs something.
- While there are lots of packages to help with package development, it is still
  a fragmented ecosystem and experience for building packages, even compared to R.

> - It's multi-paradigm nature is also a drawback, as it can lead to a lot of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Its multi-paradigm nature is also a drawback, as it can lead to a lot of
```

  different ways to do the same thing and it doesn't implement any one of those
  paradigms very well. So the coding experience can feel a bit fragmented,
  especially when trying to use different packages that use different paradigms.
:::::
:::

## Decision outcome

While both R and Python provide a lot of power and are similarly capable of
doing both data processing work and building libraries/packages to support that

> work, we decided to use Python. One of the two main reasons are that Python is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
work, we decided to use Python. One of the two main reasons is that Python is
```

---
title: "Why Python for data processing"
description: |

>   Our core work revolves around processing data in various ways. This decision post

Reviewer 3: This sounds like our core work is data processing? 🤔 Isn't it more about developing the tooling?

Author: Hmm, I can see how that can be confusing. There's definitely a bit of a misalignment between what our landing page says and what we actually do. E.g. the core of our "streams" are building data packages up and our main design principle is "we are our first users". So our actual day to day work and our roadmap align with doing data processing as the main "value", while our landing pages implies our main work is building tools. This means we should update our landing page to match what we're actually doing.

Author: Made an issue in the landing page repo

  explains why we use Python for that work and for building libraries that simplify
  that work.
date: "2026-06-01"
categories:
  - develop
  - process
  - script
---

## Context and problem statement

::: content-hidden
State the context and some background on the issue, then write a statement in
the form of a question for the problem.
:::

> Our core work revolves around designing, building, and processing structured and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Our core work revolves around designing and building software to process structured and
```
Maybe?

Author: Hmm, not exactly. We build these tools to help our work of making data packages. It's the "stream-offshoot" that we build software tools, which supports our "stream" work.

tidied data from various uncleaned sources, so that it can be used for research
analysis. An effective and powerful language can greatly simplify this type of
work.

We [previously decided](/why-python/index.qmd) to use Python for both data
processing work as well as for developing all of our software tools, which meant
we compared languages that could do both of those things rather than just one of

> them. However, our needs for building software tools changed, especially as we

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
them. However, our needs for building software tools have changed, especially as we've
```

> shifted to building more command-line and web-based tools. Because of this, we

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
started to build more command-line and web-based tools. Because of this, we
```

reconsidered Python for building software tools, and instead [switched to

> Rust](/why-rust-for-building-software/index.qmd). We still need a language

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Rust](/why-rust-for-building-software/index.qmd). However, we still need a language
```

suitable for processing data and with this more narrow focus, we can ask the
question: *which programming language is best suited for data processing work,

> including building supporting libraries?*.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
including building libraries to support that work?*.
```
Idk about this suggestion. I was just a bit confused about what a "supporting library" meant. Could also be that adding a sentence about this need as well (wanting to build supporting libraries in the same language) before the question would help.

## Decision drivers

::: content-hidden
List some reasons for why we need to make this decision and what things have
arisen that impact work.
:::

We need a language that:

- Can be used for data processing directly and for building libraries supporting

>   data processing workflows to be re-used in other projects.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  data processing workflows that can be used across projects.
```

- Has a strong ecosystem of packages for data processing as we don't need to
  worry as much about minimizing the number of dependencies we use, unlike when
  we build software tools.
- Is widely used in the data science and data engineering community, both so
  they can contribute to our projects but also so that they can more easily
  review or re-use our work.
- Has powerful and fast packages for data processing.

## Considered options

::: content-hidden
List and describe some of the options, as well as some of the benefits and
drawbacks for each option.
:::

Our [previous post](/why-python/index.qmd) was about what language to use for
*all* purposes, not just data processing. Because of that, we compared a wider
range of languages, even if they weren't very well suited for data processing.
For example, we compared Java and C++ alongside R and Python. For this decision
post, we are focusing firmly on languages designed for data processing as well

> as with decent capabilities for building packages (libraries) to simplify that

Reviewer 3: Maybe introduce that we use these words interchangeably when one of them is first used?

data processing work. Based on our drivers and this focus, we are only comparing
two languages:

- [R](https://www.r-project.org/)
- [Python](https://www.python.org/)

There are other languages that match some of our drivers but not all of them:

- [SQL](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SQL) is a powerful language for data
  processing. However, it is not a general-purpose programming language and
  doesn't have the capabilities for building libraries to support data
  processing work, so we are excluding it from consideration.
- [Scala](https://www.scala-lang.org) is a commonly used language in data
  engineering, but is nearly unknown in data science and the research community.
- [Julia](https://julialang.org/) is a fairly new language that is designed for
  data science and has powerful data processing capabilities. But it is not
  widely used and it's mostly aimed at mathematical computation and statistical

>   analysis rather than data engineering.

Reviewer 3: But isn't the focus of this post data processing rather than data engineering?

Author: Hmmm, those are the same. Or rather, processing is a subset within data engineering. I can make that clearer in the text.

While we decided on using [Rust for building software
tools](/why-rust-for-building-software/index.qmd), we are not considering it for
data processing work because it isn't widely used in the data science and data

> engineering communities and it doesn't have a strong ecosystem of packages for

Reviewer 3: Didn't we decide to go against this "principle" by using Rust for building software tools? Why does it "count" here then? :)

Author: I can make that clearer. It isn't as widely used, so it means that we will have a much harder time processing data if we don't use it, plus we will have a much harder time getting collaborations/working with people if we use Rust for most of our data processing.

data processing (aside from [Polars](https://www.pola.rs/)). It also has a much

> steeper learning curve compared to R and Python, has features that aren't that

Reviewer 3: Aren't we beyond the steeper learning curve  as a disadvantage now that we've decided that we'll spend the time to learn Rust for building software? Or is this related to other people than our team?

Author: I will remove the learning curve, you're right, it isn't relevant here.

useful when processing data outside of a software development context (e.g.

> strict and enforced types, borrow checker), and doesn't have a

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
strict and enforced types and the borrow checker), and it doesn't have a
```

[REPL](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Read%E2%80%93eval%E2%80%93print_loop)
functionality that makes data processing more interactive and easier to do.

### R

[R](https://www.r-project.org) is an open-source programming language and
software environment for statistical computing and graphics supported by the R
Foundation for Statistical Computing. The R language is widely used among
statisticians and data analysts for developing statistical methods and doing
data analysis.

::: columns

> ::::: column

Reviewer 3: I get a warning locally about the `:::` somewhere in this file. But maybe that will be resolved by formatting locally. 

Edit: It seems my local formatter doesn't like having `:::(+)` directly after a list, but needs a newline just before. Otherwise, it adds an indent before it to match with the list indentation.

Author: You might need to update from main? Or update your User VSCode settings to use Panache for formatting.

#### Benefits

- Is one of the most commonly used open-source languages in data science and the
  research community, aside from Python and SQL.
- Has a massive, friendly, and supportive community.
- Has a large number of packages, including many powerful data processing

>   packages.

Reviewer 3: Is this different from the two following points, or can it be removed?

- Has great integration with many powerful data processing tools, such as
  [Arrow](https://arrow.apache.org/), [DuckDB](https://duckdb.org/), and can
  easily connect with databases via [DBI](https://dbi.r-dbi.org/).
- Beginner friendly data analysis tools via the
  [tidyverse](https://tidyverse.org/), which provides a consistent and
  user-friendly interface to most data processing tasks (like the tools
  mentioned above).
- Has an effective and powerful package development system that makes it easy to
  quickly build and share packages.
- Has an extremely flexible programming environment, where there are few rules
  on how things are done. It was designed in a way to do analysis interactively
  in the R console, rather than to write scripts that are run from start to
  finish. This means it is very easy to get started, write code that works, and
  get stuff done quickly.
:::::

::::: column
#### Drawbacks

- Package dependency management isn't really built into the language, so pinning
  specific versions of packages used is quite difficult and depends on external
  tools like [renv](https://rstudio.github.io/renv/) (which itself has a number
  of limitations).

> - Is not as commonly used with the data engineering community and ecosystem,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Is not as commonly used within the data engineering community,
```

  likely because it mainly came from statistics and analysis, rather than from
  data processing and engineering.

> - It isn't as well-developed for building packages compared to other languages,

Reviewer 3: Also compared to Python which is the only language we compare it with here?

  as it doesn't yet have continuous delivery tools for distributing packages,
  nor are the checks that CRAN (the package registry) runs publicly available,
  which makes it more difficult to build packages that pass the CRAN checks

>   without first uploading to them.

Reviewer 3: + running CRAN checks via `devtools` is slooow

- Its flexibility in the programming environment is also its weakness, as it can
  lead to unexpected issues and behaviours if you don't know the language well
  enough to know how to avoid those pitfalls. Because of this, writing code that
  is robust, reliable, re-usable, and reproducible is a bit harder to achieve

>   compared to other languages.

Reviewer 3: Also compared to Python which is the only language we compare it with here?

:::::
:::

### Python

[Python](https://www.python.org/) is an interpreted, high-level, general-purpose
programming language. Python's design philosophy emphasizes code readability,
for example by using whitespace as part of its syntax. Its language uses an
object-oriented approach and is often quoted as being ["the second-best language

> for everything"](https://sixfeetup.com/blog/4-reasons-to-choose-python).

Reviewer 3: Maybe add why that's a good thing? :)

  databases can be easily connected into Python with packages like
  [SQLAlchemy](https://www.sqlalchemy.org/), and many data processing tools have
  Python bindings, such as [Arrow](https://arrow.apache.org/),
  [DuckDB](https://duckdb.org/), [Spark](https://spark.apache.org/), and
  [Polars](https://www.pola.rs/).
- It has packages for easily connecting to different sources, such as web APIs
  and other programming languages.
- It has a lot of programming features from different paradigms, which means it
  is flexible in how it can be used and written.
- Like R, it is dynamically typed, which means you don't need to worry about
  types when writing code, so it can be easy to write something that (at least
  seems to) work and get stuff done quickly.
- Its package development features are quite good, especially when paired with
  tools like [uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/), and distributing packages through
  [PyPI](https://pypi.org/) can be done with a single command and integrated
  into continuous delivery pipelines.
- Because it is used in so many different industries and communities and has so
  many packages, there is a robust ecosystem of tools to make it easier to build

>   stable and reliable packages (compared to R and similar languages).

Reviewer 3: Which tools are that? also uv and PyPi? Just wondering how this item is different from the one above it :)

:::::

::::: column
#### Drawbacks

- The documentation for different packages is of inconsistent quality, even
  within the official Python documentation. This can make it difficult to
  effectively use some functionality or packages.
- Like R, Python's flexibility is also its weakness, as it doesn't have strong
  guardrails when writing code. This means it can be harder to know if the code
  you wrote is actually doing what you think it's doing, even if it runs and
  outputs something.
- While there are lots of packages to help with package development, it is still
  a fragmented ecosystem and experience for building packages, even compared to R.
- Its multi-paradigm nature is also a drawback, as it can lead to a lot of
  different ways to do the same thing and it doesn't implement any one of those
  paradigms very well. So the coding experience can feel a bit fragmented,
  especially when trying to use different packages that use different paradigms.
:::::
:::

## Decision outcome

While both R and Python provide a lot of power and are similarly capable of
doing both data processing work and building libraries/packages to support that

> work, we decided to use Python. One of the two main reasons is that Python is

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
work, we've decided to use Python. One of the two main reasons is that Python is
```

> more widely used in the data engineering community, so will (over time) have a

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
more widely used in the data engineering community, so it will (over time) have a
```

---
title: "Why Python for data engineering"
description: |
  Our core, value-driven work revolves around engineering data in various ways

>   and developing data into data packages.  This decision post explains why we

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  and developing data into data packages. This decision post explains why we
```

Our core, [stream-aligned](https://teamtopologies.com/key-concepts) work is
creating, building, and continually developing data packages. Our data
engineering tasks revolve around designing, building, and processing data from
various uncleaned sources into a final, structured and tidied data package. This
data package can then be used for research analysis. Using an effective and
powerful language can greatly simplify this type of work.

We [previously decided](/why-python/index.qmd) to use Python for both data
engineering work as well as for developing all of our software tools, which
meant we compared languages that could do both of those things rather than just
one of them. However, our needs for building software tools have changed,
especially as we've started to build more command-line and web-based tools.
Because of this, we reconsidered Python for building software tools, and instead
[switched to Rust](/why-rust-for-building-software/index.qmd). However, we still
need a language suitable for data engineering and with this narrower focus, we
can ask the question:

*Which programming language is best suited for data engineering work, including

> for building libraries to support that work?*.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
building libraries to support that work?*.
```

programming language. Python's design philosophy emphasizes code readability,
for example by using whitespace as part of its syntax. Its language uses an
object-oriented approach and is often quoted as being ["the second-best language
for everything"](https://sixfeetup.com/blog/4-reasons-to-choose-python) and the
["glue"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Python_(programming_language)) between
other languages and environments. This means that it can do a lot of different
things, even if it doesn't do any one of those things well. This makes it a

> flexible language to do a wide variety of tasks in.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
flexible language to do a wide variety of tasks.
```
